With five instructions active in any clock cycle, the challenge is to associate an
exception with the appropriate instruction. Moreover, multiple exceptions can
occur simultaneously in a single clock cycle. The normal solution is to prioritize
the exceptions so that it is easy to determine which is serviced first; this strategy
works for pipelined processors as well. In most MIPS implementations, the hardware sorts exceptions so that the earliest instruction is interrupted.
I/O device requests and hardware malfunctions are not associated with a specific instruction, so the implementation has some flexibility as to when to interrupt the pipeline. Hence, using the mechanism used for other exceptions works
just fine.
The EPC captures the address of the interrupted instructions, and the MIPS
Cause register records all possible exceptions in a clock cycle, so the exception
software must match the exception to the instruction. An important clue is knowing in which pipeline stage a type of exception can occur. For example, an undefined instruction is discovered in the ID stage, and invoking the operating system
occurs in the EX stage. Exceptions are collected in the Cause register so that the
hardware can interrupt based on later exceptions, once the earliest one has been
serviced.
The hardware and the operating system must work in conjunction so that exceptions behave as you would expect. The hardware contract is normally to stop the
offending instruction in midstream, let all prior instructions complete, flush all
following instructions, set a register to show the cause of the exception, save the
address of the offending instruction, and then jump to a prearranged address. The
operating system contract is to look at the cause of the exception and act appropriately. For an undefined instruction, hardware failure, or arithmetic overflow
exception, the operating system normally kills the program and returns an indicator of the reason. For an I/O device request or an operating system service call, the
operating system saves the state of the program, performs the desired task, and, at
some point in the future, restores the program to continue execution. In the case
of I/O device requests, we may often choose to run another task before resuming
the task that requested the I/O, since that task may often not be able to proceed
until the I/O is complete. This is why the ability to save and restore the state of any
task is critical. One of the most important and frequent uses of exceptions is handling page faults and TLB exce
advanced book, Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, third edition,
where the material covered in the next 18 pages is expanded to over 200 pages!
Pipelining exploits the potential parallelism among instructions. This parallelism is called instruction-level parallelism (ILP). There are two primary methods
for increasing the potential amount of instruction-level parallelism. The first is
increasing the depth of the pipeline to overlap more instructions. Using our laundry analogy and assuming that the washer cycle were longer than the others, we
could divide our washer into three machines that perform the wash, rinse, and
spin steps of a traditional washer. We would then move from a four-stage to a sixstage pipeline. To get the full speedup, we need to rebalance the remaining steps so
they are the same length, in processors or in laundry. The amount of parallelism
being exploited is higher, since there are more operations being overlapped. Performance is potentially greater since the clock cycle can be shorter.
Another approach is to replicate the internal components of the computer so
that it can launch multiple instructions in every pipeline stage. The general name
for this technique is multiple issue. A multiple-issue laundry would replace our
household washer and dryer with, say, three washers and three dryers. You would
also have to recruit more assistants to fold and put away three times as much laundry in the same amount of time. The downside is the extra work to keep all the
machines busy and transferring the loads to the next pipeline stage.
Launching multiple instructions per stage allows the instruction execution rate
to exceed the clock rate or, stated alternatively, for the CPI to be less than 1. It is
sometimes useful to flip the metric, and use IPC, or instructions per clock cycle,
particularly as values become less than 1! Hence, a 6 GHz four-way multiple-issue
microprocessor can execute a peak rate of 24 billion instructions per second and
have a best case CPI of 0.25, or IPC of 4. Assuming a five-stage pipeline, such a
processor would have 20 instructions in execution at any given time. Today’s highend microprocessors attempt to issue from three to eight instructions in every
clock cycle. There are typically, however, many constraints on what types of
instructions may be executed simultaneously and what happens when dependences arise.
There are two major ways to implement a multiple-issue processor, with the
major difference being the division of work between the compiler and the hardware. Because the division of work dictates whether decisions are being made statically (that is, at compile time) or dynamically (that is, during execution), the
approaches are sometimes called static multiple issue and dynamic multiple
issue. As we will see, both approaches have 
eculation was correct, the instructions are completed by allowing the contents of the buffers to be written to the registers or memory. If the speculation was
incorrect, the hardware flushes the buffers and reexecutes the correct instruction
sequence.
Speculation introduces one other possible problem: speculating on certain
instructions may introduce exceptions that were formerly not present. For example, suppose a load instruction is moved in a speculative manner, but the address
it uses is not legal when the speculation is incorrect. The result would be that an
exception that should not have occurred will occur. The problem is complicated
by the fact that if the load instruction were not speculative, then the exception
must occur! In compiler-based speculation, such problems are avoided by adding
special speculation support that allows such exceptions to be ignored until it is
clear that they really should occur. In hardware-based speculation, exceptions are
simply buffered until it is clear that the instruction causing them is no longer
speculative and is ready to complete; at that point the exception is raised, and normal exception handling proceeds.
Since speculation can improve performance when done properly and decrease
performance when done carelessly, significant effort goes into deciding when it is
appropriate to speculate. Later in this section, we will examine both static and
dynamic techniques for speculation.
Static Multiple Issue
Static multiple-issue processors all use the compiler to assist with packaging
instructions and handling hazards. In a static issue processor, you can think of the
set of instructions that issue in a given clock cycle, which is called an issue packet,
as one large instruction with multiple operations. This view is more than an analogy. Since a static multiple-issue processor usually restricts what mix of instructions can be initiated in a given clock cycle, it is useful to think of the issue packet
as a single instruction allowing several operations in certain predefined fields.
This view led to the original name for this approach: Very Long Instruction Word
(VLIW). The Intel IA-64 architecture uses this approach, which it calls by its own
name: Explicitly Parallel Instruction Computer (EPIC). The Itanium and Itanium
2 processors, available in 2000 and 2002, respectively, are the first implementations of the IA-64 architecture.
Most static issue processors also rely on the compiler to take on some responsibility for handling data and control hazards. The compiler’s responsibilities
may include static branch prediction and code scheduling to reduce or preve